# Algorithms & Big O Notation in Plain English

> by [Pavan Katepalli]((https://github.com/pavankat))

> Edited by [Nick Bartlett](https://github.com/tteltrab), and [Nick West](https://github.com/njwest).

## What are algorithms?

Algorithms are basically functions.

Functions that are algorithms:

1. take in arguments

2. explicitly return values

#### 1.1 Example of an algorithm

Algorithm that counts the number of vowels in a word and returns the count:

```js
function countVowels(word) {
    var vowels = ['a', 'i', 'e', 'o', 'u'];
    var count = 0;
		for (var i = 0; i < word.length; i++) {
        for (var j = 0; j < vowels.length; j++) {
            if (word[i] === vowels[j]) {
                count++;
            }
        }
    }
    return count;
}

```

## When are functions not algorithms?
When you write a function it may or may not

* have arguments

* return a value

Functions that don't take arguments or return a value are usually used to dry up repetitive code, print something to the screen, or serve as an argument to be executed later. These types of functions typically aren't referred to as algorithms.

#### 1.2 Example of a function that is not an algorithm

An anonymous function that gets passed to jQuery's `on` function. 

```js
$('button').on('click', function(){ 
	alert('hi') 
});
```

#### 1.3 Example of a function that is not an algorithm

This function has no arguments, no return

```js
function clearDiv(){
	$('#div').html("");
}
```
#### 1.4 Example of a function that is not an algorithm

This function has an argument, but no return

```js
function clearDiv(text){
	$('#div').text(text);
}
```

## What is Big O?

Big O is short for Big O Notiation.

Big O is how programmers talk about scalability of algorithms.

An algorithm's Big O Notation is determined by how long the algorithm takes to return output in the **worst case scenario**.

The math term for the **worst case scenario** is **"upper bound"**.

## How do you say O(n)

O(n) reads as "Order of N" or short for "O of N".

The O function is the Order function.

## Why is it called Big O?

Because we're dealing with orders of magnitude. `O` is used because the growth rate of a function is also referred to as the **"order of the function"**.

## Why is Big O important?

Understanding the Big O of algorithms will
* get you into the mindset of coding for efficiency. Ex: "I have to change this algorithm because it's O(n!)!"
* help you talk code to other developers. Ex: "Don't worry, I changed up the algorithm so it not O(n^2). It's O(n) now."
* help you for interviews. You will be able to talk about efficiency of algorithms that you whiteboard. Ex: "What I just coded out is O(n^2)."